Hello, colleagues.
Today we will talk about a topic that can be called one of the most
perturbing, if not the most perturbing, in the entire system of staff management.
Because we are talking about money.
We understand that money is such a thing that interests everyone, or almost everyone.
It interests us as HR people, it interests us as representatives of the employer,
and, of course, it is very interesting for the employees of our enterprises.
We will consider this topic from different angles, because, despite its extreme complexity,
it can be divided into a number of rather simple elements.
Our task is to learn to see these elements, understand how they work,
and effectively connect a single system of staff management of our enterprise.
To do this, we will touch on three main global topics.
The first is to consider the stimulation of labor payment in the context of enterprise management as a whole.
What are the possibilities, what are the restrictions, what are the open patterns,
what can be used here, and so on.
The second is to look at the specific tools of stimulation of labor.
It seems that there are not so many of them, as it might seem,
but each of them can take on very different forms.
In the third part, we will consider how these tools can be used in the context of a specific organization
to solve its problems and to create a system of stimulation of labor in the organization as a whole
and for the most frequently meeting positions.
To be honest, I would like to start this lesson with a little anecdote.
Imagine a picture. A young man, a manager, comes to work.
He asks a social worker, what is your social package?
The worker says, as it should be under the labor code.
We pay for vacations, hospitals, and that's it.
Yes, but in the place where I used to work, I had a paid car, paid cellular communication,
vacation twice a year, paid trips to the Bahamas, food, education for children, medical insurance.
So why did you leave such a wonderful place?
The company went bankrupt.
Strictly speaking, everything we will discuss here is about one global topic.
How to make people in the organization work,
to make them like it, to make them work effectively,
not to leave the organization, that is, to be loyal to it,
and at the same time not to let the company go bankrupt.
So, let's start.
First, we need to consider some basic concepts related to our topic.
There are only four of them.
These are labor motivation, labor stimulation, compensation, and labor satisfaction.
Unfortunately, in practice, they are often confused with each other.
So let's agree on what we will call in the future, so that we can speak the same language.
So, labor motivation is the broadest concept,
which refers to some internal mechanism of a human personality,
which determines what a person will do at work,
and whether he will work at all, and why he does it.
When I said internal mechanisms,
I didn't mean to deceive you, but I distorted the situation a little,
because this internal thing is closely related to the external one.
It is easy to understand that the motivation of a worker in the 1930s,
a machine operator at a factory,
and the motivation of a modern manager who works in the market conditions
are slightly different.
But we will not go into this topic.
We all know the theory of motivation,
starting from the famous Pyramid of Oil,
the hierarchy of needs,
ending with modern theories of motivation.
We will not consider them.
I hope you will read about it or learn about it in other parts of our course.
The second concept is labor stimulation.
Stimulation is the whole set of factors,
the whole set of conditions that a worker creates
to make the motivation of a worker as effective as possible.
Compensation is part of stimulation.
If stimulation includes both moral and material aspects,
then compensation, when we say this expression,
we usually mean what our worker gets from the work of the employer in a natural form.
In the form of money, goods or services.
Here again there is a little subtlety,
because, as you know, the division of moral and material is also quite conditional.
Imagine that I paid you a bonus of 28 kopecks.
How would you feel about it?
You will probably perceive it as an insult.
So, bonuses, material factors are a signal that the employer sends to his worker.
A signal about how he feels about his worker and what he thinks about him.
On the other hand, the so-called moral factors also require costs.
Imagine that we organized a corporate party.
We have the New Year, or March 8, or the day of our company, the birthday.
A corporate holiday.
It is believed that this is primarily a moral factor, which brings people together, and so on.
But how much money is spent on this?
In other words, material factors always have a moral side,
and moral factors require material costs.
And finally, the concept of satisfaction with work.
There is a common view that a person must be satisfied with work, and then everything will be fine.
As you know, there are 6-12 different factors that determine the satisfaction with work.
I will note that compensation is only one of them,
although far from the last, usually one of the first, but not always the first.
There is one unpleasant moment.
There is a phenomenon called the phenomenon of contentment.
When people at work are absolutely satisfied, they do not need anything,
they live very well and happily, but the efficiency is practically zero.
Therefore, satisfaction with work is a reflection of people,
a reflection in the public consciousness of our company employees of whether they are doing well or not.
But to what extent this satisfaction affects the efficiency of their work is the second question.
Of course, one thing can be said for sure,
that unsatisfied workers will most likely work poorly,
but I am afraid that satisfied workers will be good, and this is not always the case.
Like any management system, the compensation system that we will talk about can be more or less effective.
Let's consider the criteria that determine the effectiveness of the work stimulation system at the enterprise,
or rather the signs that we can judge how effective or ineffective this system is.
The first and foremost is, of course, the adequate level of quality and productivity of work at the enterprise.
If these indicators, the quality of work, the quality of work,
the productivity of work, are much lower than in the industry,
or in the relatively similar working sectors of the market and enterprises,
then something is probably not quite right with our system, and we need to study what is happening to it.
The second indicator or criterion of effectiveness is the stability of the staff.
It is clear that if people are not satisfied with their work,
they are not satisfied with the local work,
they do not like the stimulation system, then most likely they will leave it.
As a result, increased flow of staff occurs,
when many people come, many people leave, the staff is unstable,
and because of this, the enterprise actually loses a lot of money,
because people have to be looked for, it costs money,
people have to be trained, it costs money again,
sometimes important areas are neglected, and this must be somehow compensated for.
Therefore, the flow of staff is certainly not a very good indicator,
and, as a rule, it is explained by the poor quality of stimulation of work at the enterprise, but not always.
And if the staff is stable or relatively stable?
Now we will have to touch on another very important criterion,
which is quite rarely mentioned,
but, unfortunately, it has a very strong impact on the performance and quality of work at our enterprise.
An effective stimulation system should lead not only to people working well,
but also to the fact that the weak employees leave the enterprise first of all,
employees who do not bring the enterprise what it should bring,
and the strong ones should stay at the same time.
In other words, an effective stimulation system should contribute to the elimination of weak employees from the company
and to the preservation of strong employees in the company.
But, unfortunately, we often observe the opposite process.
It turns out that strong employees systematically leave the company,
and even more offensively, employees who were trained by the enterprise,
invested funds in them, and the weak ones remain,
and the opposite problem arises, how to get rid of the weak ones,
but then there will be no one to work at all.
The next criterion is how easily and effectively vacancies are filled.
If the threshold of our organization is the number of people willing to work in it,
then our stimulation system is adequate,
and we have a positive reputation as a employer in the labor market.
But if our HR department cannot fill important vacancies for a month, two, three, four,
then, most likely, something is also wrong with the stimulation system.
People come, find out what conditions we have, and leave immediately.
They do not like these conditions, and someone can offer better ones.
The next and last factor, which is not very common to talk about,
but it is necessary, is the theft and abuse of our employees.
There is an old saying from Soviet times,
they steal what we do not pay them.
If the organization, consciously or unconsciously,
does not provide the right level of stimulation for its staff,
and the staff is forced to compensate for this by theft,
then this is probably not a very good sign.
Usually, if you count, the damage to the enterprise from all this mischief
greatly covers the savings on labor payment and other factors of stimulation.
So, these are the five factors, five criteria,
which show how effective our stimulation system is,
and how effective the system of compensation management is.
The first thing to say is the management.
Management means that the management knows well how much it pays to employees,
how much it spends on staff, why it spends so much,
and can, if necessary, adjust these costs, increase or decrease.
The opposite picture is when the organization does not know
how much it spends on staff.
Maybe it will seem surprising to you,
but in our enterprises this situation is very common.
The fact is that many of our enterprises, both small and large,
which emerged after the 1990s,
went through certain stages of development.
At the early stages, the stimulation system, the labor payment system,
was not very needed.
There were few people, everyone did everything, take more, throw more,
and as a result, the labor payment system was built on the system of personal agreements.
More precisely, on the non-system of personal agreements.
And now, if this has not changed in the organization,
if we look at how much the organization pays to employees in different positions,
it turns out that there is no system here.
There is such a patchwork, which has historically developed.
Why is that? Where did it come from? Nobody understands.
And of course, it is difficult to recognize such a system as effective.
The second is the clarity of the reward system, the stimulation system for employees.
An employee must understand what he gets more for,
what he gets less for, and what he gets in general.
Then he will know what behavior is maintained in this company, and what is the opposite.
It turns out that the reward either does not correspond to the achievements and results,
or it comes too late, and the employee does not see the connection between the reward and the results of his work.
So this clarity is a necessary factor without which the system cannot be effective.
The next is the combination of the reward system of material and moral factors.
That is, we must understand what signals we send to the workers,
providing a particular system of labor stimulation.
Let's say we pay a person a percentage of the volume of the contracts they have,
or a percentage, a certain amount, of the number of products they have produced.
Thus, we send a very simple signal.
We are only interested in how a machine for money production or production of parts, products, and nothing else.
Will such a person work effectively?
For some time, yes, but until another employer offers him better conditions.
Therefore, it is necessary to closely monitor how people perceive the reward system,
the stimulation system, and ensure an adequate combination of material and moral factors in one system.
The next extremely important external factor in relation to our enterprise,
we cannot control it, but we can control it.
This is the correspondence of the reward system with the labor market.
The market is the market.
We will deal with it separately.
The market, market criteria are some of the most important for the formation of a system of stimulation on the enterprise.
We will talk about it in detail separately.
Unfortunately, we see a picture when the labor market is changing.
It is changing very quickly in the 10s of the 21st century, and many organizations simply do not have time for it.
I must note that paying the market value both lower and higher is equally harmful for the enterprise.
Why? You probably already guessed, if we recall the anecdote I told at the beginning.
The next factor that determines the effectiveness of the stimulated staff is the compliance with the enterprise goals.
This means that the stimulation system must reinforce the behavior of the worker that meets our needs and what we want from the worker,
and vice versa, so that this system does not punish or reward the behavior that we do not need.
Can it be that the stimulation system does not meet the enterprise goals?
It can. There are many cases when the stimulation system encourages the worker to behave in a way that is not necessary for the enterprise.
We will consider examples with you.
A little later.
The next extremely important factor, but I would say one of the most mysterious and incomprehensible, is the factor of justice.
Justice is objective, that is, a person should probably get more for more qualified, more difficult, more responsible work,
than for less qualified, responsible, difficult and difficult.
But there is also a subjectively understandable factor of justice.
How much does a person, a worker, and the employees of our enterprise perceive the payment of labor, the stimulation system,
as fair in relation to themselves or not fair?
The first thing that probably determines this feeling of justice is a situation when more productive, productive and quality work is rewarded
higher than less productive, productive and quality.
Unfortunately, in many enterprises we see a level playing field, when no matter how you work, you will not earn more,
and an efficient person gets the same as his neighbor, who, so to speak, does not really strain at work.
This, of course, should be avoided in every possible way.
And finally, the last thing I would like to dwell on is the reward system, the stimulation system,
which should reward both individual and general results of the worker,
in the company as a whole, in the division, in the working group, in the department, in the collective.
If only individual results are rewarded, this often leads to very unproductive effects in the form of internal competition between workers.
Well, imagine that one sales manager rejects an order from another sales manager only to earn more.
And the company loses on this.
It loses its reputation among clients, both in profitability and in everything else.
Therefore, it is necessary to closely monitor that both individual and general results are rewarded harmoniously.
And there are such roles in an organization that should be stimulated and rewarded exclusively on individual results.
I mean managers, and, first of all, managers of the front line,
because their task is to ensure the workability, resultivity, quality of the work of the team, group, team.
If we have a great, wonderful manager and he himself works very effectively,
but for some reason his team does not work very well, what should we reward?
And do we need such a manager at all?
So, we want to manage the labor stimulation system at the enterprise.
What does it mean to manage?
The axiom of the theory of management is that the object of management should be managed.
That is, what will we manage?
And the subject of management, that is, who should do it?
The first and second questions about the labor stimulation system are quite complicated.
Let's try to find an answer to them.
First, let's start with the subject, who will manage?
The fact is that the labor stimulation system permeates the entire enterprise from top to bottom.
It concerns all employees and each in its own department.
Therefore, it is very difficult to select one person, one role, one position, who should be engaged in this management.
Therefore, as often happens in modern management, when it comes to all organizations,
something is created, conventionally speaking, called a committee.
In this case, we will talk about the labor payment committee and see what roles are present in it,
who should participate there and who performs what functions.
At the same time, we will look at what will happen if one or another member of our committee
falls out of the management system.
The first and foremost is a person who must make a final decision,
who must determine the policy of the organization in relation to labor payment
and be the main and ultimate in solving the problems and conflicts that may arise in this regard.
This is none other than the director of the enterprise.
In English, it will be a CEO, chief executive, and in our case, it is usually a general director.
Can a general director take on all the authority?
Of course, he can, but he probably does not have the function of responsibility for managing the labor payment system,
because he has many other tasks.
If he is only engaged in labor payment, then who will be engaged in production,
who will be engaged in the implementation of products and financial services?
Therefore, a certain character is needed, who will combine all the main functions in his management,
leaving the task of making final decisions and determining the direction in which the system will move.
And this is, of course, HR director, that is, a person who is responsible for working with the staff.
He differs from all other members of our committee in that he is professional, or she is, more often than not,
he understands what he is doing, listened to our lecture course, at least studied somewhere else,
and knows how this system should be managed, what factors should be controlled, how, and so on.
And the second function, the second role in this system of HR director is the center of responsibility,
that is, a person who unites in himself, coordinates the entire management system, responsible for it as a whole.
In short, a person who has all the information and to whom everyone should come,
and has the right and opportunity to come for the obtaining of this information.
The next active person who certainly participates in the management system is the chief accountant.
The fact is that a significant part of the costs that the enterprise carries for maintaining its staff are taxes.
And in any case, the payment of labor, all the costs that should be incurred by the enterprise,
are the prerogatives of the chief accountant.
This is what interests him, he should do this.
The next is the financial director.
The financial director deals with the economy of the enterprise as a whole.
He understands where the enterprise is moving, what are its plans, how much money the enterprise earns,
and how effective it is.
This is not the same as accounting.
This is a completely different job.
Can you do without a financial director in this case?
I'm afraid it will be difficult, because if the financial director does not take part in this process,
then we will have a hard time controlling how much money we spend and whether we are doing it right.
Finally, there are also directors in directions.
These are people who head large structural units of the enterprise.
The same director of production, the same director of sales, the commercial director.
Do they need to be in this committee?
What will happen if they do not take part in its work?
Most likely, nothing good will happen,
simply because people will be faced with certain decisions that they may not agree with.
They see the situation in the directions they are headed in better than others.
Therefore, they should have the right to express their position,
their needs, their proposals, and have the right to defend and discuss them.
Such a structure, consisting of a number of active people,
and the first members of the enterprise, I repeat,
should be engaged in the system of compensation management.
What will happen if we decide that it is enough to give all this to one person?
If it is the director, then his position is probably too high to understand the situation in detail.
He will probably make decisions that are more likely to be volitional,
and I am afraid that the effectiveness of such decisions will not be optimal.
It often happens that the chief accountant is engaged in the issue of compensation,
payment of labor, and stimulation.
The chief accountant is a person of very high qualification.
He must know a lot, he must be able to do a lot.
But what he does not have to know is the understanding of the situation in the labor market
and the understanding of the basic behavior of people.
What will happen if the chief accountant takes on the single-person management of the system of compensation management?
I can give a simple example.
I observed him.
At the factory, the turner receives 15,627.18 rubles per month,
and the next month he will receive 16,325.19 rubles, and so on.
And a whole staff of workers will calculate these kopecks.
How effective is this?
Maybe we can do without a financial director?
I am afraid that this will be quite difficult,
because if we remove him from our management system,
the system will simply not know how effective it is.
The accountant cannot calculate this.
Only the financial director can calculate this,
if only these months are not combined in one person.
And what will happen if he is entrusted with the management of the system of compensation?
So what will happen if we give the reins of management to the financial director of the enterprise?
I am afraid that the same problems will arise,
which we discussed in the aspect of the chief accountant as the chief acting person.
The financial director should be engaged in profitability and efficiency,
but not always he is able to combine this with understanding of how the labor market works,
how it is arranged, where there are declines in the labor market,
where there are drops, where there are surges.
This is not his duty, he does not have to know this.
He does not have to know how the social, subjective component of the workers' reaction to the labor stimulation system is arranged.
Therefore, it is unlikely that he will be able to cope with such a task effectively.
And finally, let's take the last acting persons,
these are the managers, the directors of the management.
What if we simply give them the reins of management in their hands,
and let them decide how much to pay their own workers?
This may seem paradoxical,
but in our country, in most organizations, which once began as small,
then grew, grew, grew,
this was observed, and is still observed.
The manager comes to the director of the enterprise and says,
I urgently need a few more workers,
or I have a lot of staff, I need to raise people's salaries.
And the director says, please, let's raise them.
As a result, the system acquires the character of the most gentle blanket,
which we have already talked about.
Therefore, we are obliged to listen to the directors in the direction,
we are obliged to understand their position,
but if we give them the reins of management of this system in their hands,
if we completely rely on them in relation to the fact that the system works,
well, most likely, there will be no big loss,
because no one has canceled the system of swans, crayfish and pike yet.
As a result, it turns out that the system either does not manage, does not work,
or works, but in a direction in which no one was going to move it.
It moves by itself, and we look at it and wonder,
why does it work like this?
I would like it to be different.
In conclusion, I will say that it is quite rare at enterprises to see
such a group of interested and responsible people engaged in the system of labor stimulation.
Unfortunately, in most cases, the distortions, the inefficiency of the system arise
precisely because such a community does not exist, it is not coordinated,
individual actors either get out of it or take on an unusual role,
and as a result, we have a loss of efficiency.
Therefore, if you do not really like how the system of labor stimulation is arranged at your enterprise,
please look at who is involved in the management and what functions these people perform.
It is possible that someone is missing, and the subject of the management system will have to be changed.
We have just discussed with you the question of who should participate in the management of the labor stimulation system.
We found out that this work is team, collective, and it is necessary to integrate the points of view of very different parties.
Now let's see what factors determine the system of labor payment at the enterprise.
In general, these factors can be divided into internal factors, those that come from within the company,
and external factors, which are not managed by the system, are in the external environment,
and certainly have a great impact on how much we can, must, and should pay our people and spend on the staff as a whole.
So let's start with the external factors.
The first main factor is the labor market.
This is a very complex and interesting thing.
Now we are in a situation where the labor market is changing very quickly and unpredictably.
HR directors say that the labor market has gone mad.
It used to be very easy to find people, but it is very easy to be an attraction.
It used to be easy enough to find staff.
Quite difficult vacancies were closed for about a month and a half,
but now you have to look for a person for 2-3 months, and it is not always possible to find exactly the one you want and in the conditions that we offer.
The labor market is an external factor in relation to our company.
We cannot influence it in any way, we cannot change it,
but we can monitor it, as they say now, monitor and control,
and understand the situation and change our behavior in the labor market accordingly,
because now one of our main tasks is to be an attractive employer in the labor market.
Why? We will discuss this a little later, when we talk about how the labor market works.
The second factor is legislation.
State, municipal and local authorities adopt certain laws or acts,
which we must consider in our incentive system if we want to be law-abiding citizens.
We cannot influence this, but at least we can monitor and control it.
The organization of the chief accountant and lawyer, who understand how it all works and should work, plays a very important role here.
The next extremely important external factor is economic conjuncture.
How does the situation in the country's economy, in the world economy, and in general, work?
We know that there are ups and downs, market fluctuations.
Some market participants earn a lot of money and prosper, others, unfortunately, do not.
This is not permanent, but temporary.
In other words, the question of how much we should spend on staff, how much we should pay our employees,
largely depends on what is happening in the market around us.
This is a factor that we cannot control, but we must understand and effectively control.
Finally, this is the situation in the sector of the market in which we work.
The economy and conjuncture as a whole are good things, but there are changes, ups and downs,
stagnation, and so on, in certain sectors.
This should also be understood very well.
Let's move on to internal factors.
The first and main one is the economy of our enterprise.
Why is the issue of staffing costs and the incentive system so important to us?
This is one of the main economic indicators of the operation of our enterprise.
At the same time, staffing costs are one of the main factors.
At some enterprises, they can account for 40-50% of the budget.
At other enterprises, they can account for 80%.
But, one way or another, this is a very significant figure.
Here we can recall the old Russian saying,
go and stretch your legs.
Maybe I would like to pay my employees a lot and invest a lot of money in them,
but, unfortunately, I do not have such funds and I will hardly have them in the near future.
It is interesting to note that the economy of the company is connected with the level of labor payment
and the incentive system as a whole, but not linearly.
One might think that big, rich companies pay their employees a lot,
and small and poor companies pay little.
This is not always the case.
The fact is that at a large enterprise, especially an industrial enterprise,
a lot of money is spent on the maintenance of equipment,
buildings, infrastructure, land, and so on.
If an enterprise has nothing but the brains of the people who work there,
then, of course, the costs can be much higher.
The second important factor is the personnel policy.
This is the general principle of our attitude to the personnel,
what we think about the personnel, how we treat them,
what principles we follow.
The personnel policy can be summed up in three main points.
The first is where we get the people who work for us.
The second is how we treat them.
And the third is why we part with them.
It would seem that all this is simple and understandable,
but in fact, the personnel policy has a significant degree of subjectivism.
The executive board only formalizes it.
It is rather planned or unplanned,
consciously or not,
and, most importantly, it is more or less in line with the personnel policy of the company.
Unfortunately, it is often far from the personnel policy.
We will see how it works very soon.
The next extremely important internal factor
that determines the system of labor payment for enterprises
is the technology used.
I mean the technology in the broadest sense of the word,
starting with the machines and equipment used,
the most modern machines that work almost without a person,
or the good old lathe, the DIP.
I learned to work on it.
DIP is a machine that is as good as the American machine.
It depends on how qualified the lathe is,
how high the level is, what it can and cannot do.
I am also talking about information technologies.
Today, this is one of the main problems.
Information technologies, management technologies,
can do something for a person,
can replace him,
and, on the contrary,
can demand higher personnel qualifications.
Therefore, it is necessary to take into account
how much technology used by our company
requires a high level of personnel qualification and responsibility,
and how much, on the contrary, it reduces these requirements.
This and that should be taken into account
in the labor stimulation system.
The next internal factor that cannot be left out
is the opinion of the workers.
Paradoxically, there are organizations
where the stimulation system,
compared to others, is very well done,
and people earn a lot,
but for some reason they are not satisfied with it.
They find it boring and uninteresting,
they come to work,
and they are well-off,
they try to come less often,
if the system allows it.
But there are opposite situations,
when they are not paid much,
and somewhere they could have earned more money.
However, the atmosphere of the enterprise is such
that people are satisfied, happy,
they like to work here,
they are proud of their work,
and I do not want to lure them
into the best stimulation system.
It is quite difficult to put it mildly.
In other words, this is a subjective factor,
another subjective factor,
apart from the personnel policy,
which must be controlled, taken into account,
and which we can form purposefully.
Who should do this?
First of all, the first persons of the enterprise,
and also in the epicenter, as always,
should be our great, powerful HR director,
who is responsible for the state of the enterprise's labor resources.
And who else?
And finally, the last factor I would like to discuss
is the stage of development
at which the enterprise is at the moment.
You probably know that any organization
goes through several stages in its development,
which can be divided into childhood,
adolescence, maturity,
and then, unfortunately,
there is often a decline.
How long does this cycle take?
It depends.
Some enterprises can run it in a few years,
others can maintain the stability stage for centuries,
or stay at the decline stage for centuries.
Nevertheless, one way or another,
the stage of the enterprise's development
greatly affects the stimulation system,
the HR policy of the enterprise,
and we have already talked about it a little.
At the stage of adolescence,
as a rule, there is no special control system
for stimulating labor,
and it is not particularly needed.
A lot is kept simply on enthusiasm.
Then there is a need to bring stimulation
to a single, controlled system.
For some time, the enterprise has been doing this,
and often spends quite a lot of money on it.
After that, the system starts to work,
and, unfortunately, it is not always effective,
because the enterprise has already overcome
the previous stage of development,
and the stimulation system is still focused on it,
it does not have time to develop the enterprise.
But one way or another,
it usually ends up at the stage of stagnation
and at the stage of reducing the efficiency of the enterprise,
if you want, at the stage of old age.
The labor stimulation system
often meets not only the needs of the enterprise,
but also the merits of its employees,
the previous combat merits.
And in this situation, it turns out
that not only the result is rewarded,
not only the efficiency, but also the loyalty,
so that everything is quiet,
no one twitches, no one performs any feats.
The system stimulates people more
to avoid mistakes than to achieve high results.
Thus, the management of the labor stimulation system
also implies that we realize
at what stage of development our enterprise is,
we control the situation and understand
where this situation will develop further.
We discussed external and internal factors
in relation to the organization,
which must be taken into account
and which can and should be managed
if we want to create an effective labor stimulation system.
I would like to dwell on several of them.
The first is the corporate policy of the enterprise.
From the point of view of labor stimulation,
the corporate policy can be divided
into two opposite, but sometimes combined,
options.
The first is the traditional policy of saving costs
and saving costs for the maintenance of staff.
This means that we look at our employees
as if they were at a cost.
And we want to make them spend less
and get more from them.
And at the final stage of their development,
such a policy turns into a shameless exploitation
of workers.
The second is the opposite policy,
which is very popular now.
It is the policy of investing in staff.
When employees of an enterprise are not considered
as something that the enterprise
is forced to spend money on,
but as human capital,
in which funds are invested
in order to develop it.
This policy sounds good,
but it has its own limitations.
We will see them now.
The fact is that the policy can be different,
but it must first of all respond to the situation
that has arisen in the economy,
industry and labor market.
Let's see how these objective factors
affect corporate policy
Let's start with the policy of saving costs.
This is an old system,
which we try to recruit staff
at a cheaper price.
And this can only be done
if the market is dominated by the employer.
If the employer determines
what will happen in the market,
who will be hired,
and how much to pay.
And the employer is forced to agree
to the conditions offered by the employer
due to the deficit of jobs.
This is a labor market
where money is expensive,
machinery is expensive,
and employees are cheap.
In this market,
we do not pay much attention
to what is good or bad.
What provides the quality of work?
A simple selection.
If there are many offers on the labor market,
people are forced to compete
for jobs,
and if the worker does not work well,
it is easy to replace him.
I will hire those who work well.
Is this possible?
Yes, in a number of sectors.
In a number of regions,
this situation is preserved.
It would be difficult to expect
a different behavior from the employer
if the conditions did not allow him to do this.
What is the policy of investment?
This is a market where the worker decides
what will happen,
what conditions he will agree to.
This means that the labor market
has a deficit of qualified workers,
and the demand for labor resources
is much higher than the demand for jobs.
This is a market where the worker decides
what conditions he will agree to.
This means that the worker has a choice
and will think about what conditions he will agree to.
In this situation,
labor resources become expensive.
They are more expensive than other resources.
Then the idea arises
that it is cheaper to create these resources
inside the enterprise,
that is, to create a system
of internal labor market.
What is this system?
It is a situation where we,
when we need to replace a vacancy,
first of all, pay attention
not to the external environment of the organization,
but to the internal one,
that is, we look for a job among our own.
This means that we need to train and develop our staff.
We need to create a career ladder,
a system of positional growth,
and we will train and develop them,
and they will look around,
find better conditions and leave us.
Now many employers complain about this.
In this situation, competition for qualified staff,
and in some cases,
as we deal with production for staff in general,
we need to change our perspective
on what staff is,
and how to consider the investment of our employees.
The policy of investment in staff
is, first of all, investment in the development
and loyalty of the staff,
and its attachment to itself.
Is it always justified?
Unfortunately, most enterprises cannot afford it,
and the policy of investment in staff
requires significant costs,
much higher than in the case of the policy of economy.
In addition, it requires the possibility
of not only the development of the staff,
but also the creation of a sufficient number
and quality of jobs within the company.
To this day,
the vast majority of completed
and logical policies of investment in staff
are implemented by large transnational corporations.
They can afford it,
and it turns out that it is more profitable
and reliable for them to educate employees
in their own environment and invest money in them
than to look for people in the open labor markets
in all the countries where they work.
But enterprises are not so big,
not so developed, not so rich,
and, unfortunately or fortunately,
they should be satisfied with less
and use a mixed policy,
where there are elements of economy and investment.
The most important thing is that the organization
understands very well what policy it implements
and why.
Is it worth it to implement this policy
or is it too early?
Maybe we will spend too much staff
and just go bankrupt,
as in the anecdote I told at the beginning.
The next thing that interests us is the labor market.
Let's dwell on it in more detail,
because it is a rather delicate matter.
Let's move on to the most important factor
that determines the system of labor payment
at enterprises as the labor market.
I would like to say a few words about the labor market.
It differs from the usual markets
of goods and services
in that it is, in a sense,
the market vice versa.
Who is a seller in the goods and services market?
The manufacturer is, in fact,
a corporation, an organization, a company.
What is sold and bought?
Goods and services.
And who is the buyer?
The buyer is a citizen who spends his money
to buy the goods and services he needs.
What happens in the labor market?
To be precise, it is vice versa.
What is sold in the labor market?
Sometimes people say,
that it is the labor resources,
that people can provide to their employer.
Who is a seller in the labor market?
The citizens.
Who is the buyer of labor resources?
Corporations and organizations.
Everything is put upside down.
The fact that the labor market is the market vice versa
makes it more complex than the goods and services market.
There are interesting collisions,
which are determined by the fact that
if a seller is professional in the goods and services market,
he has a marketing department,
he tracks the market and understands what is going on in the market.
Besides, he has a constant experience of sales,
experience of production and implementation of his products.
In the labor market, a seller is an unqualified person.
After all, no one teaches anyone
how to sell their labor resources.
How much should you ask for it?
What should you sell?
Most people are not aware of this.
It is not their fault, it is their problem.
Although we have a lot of Internet resources,
consultations, books on how to sell yourself.
Nevertheless, people do not know how to do it.
They do not sell their labor resources very often.
People do not look for a job every day or even every month.
Those who look for a job, do not find it.
Our employers do not like those who change jobs too often.
So a person can change his job three, five, six times in his life.
To what extent does he do it to qualified sellers?
It is very difficult to say.
Therefore, it often turns out that a person sells his resources
cheaper than he should.
He may not even get into his own market segment.
He may not value himself as he should value the labor market.
Let me give you an example.
One of my acquaintances worked in the United States for many years.
Then he returned to Russia.
He is a very qualified economist.
In the United States, he earned a lot of money.
However, when he came back to his country,
it turned out that he was not very well-qualified.
He was not young either.
He started looking for a job in the range of $600-800.
He could not find a job for six months.
Then he was advised to look for a job for $3,000.
What do you think?
He found it very quickly.
This is a phenomenon.
A person valued himself low and was looking for a job
not in his own market segment.
He came to a employer who needed an economist for $700.
When the employer saw what a monster he was facing,
he realized that he was not the right person for the job.
Those organizations that needed an economist for several thousand dollars
did not pay attention to the labor market segment
where there are $800 specialists.
He found a job as soon as he raised his price three times.
Speaking of paradoxical examples,
the funniest one is from my personal experience.
We hired a high-paid manager
and asked him about his claims on the level of the labor payment.
He said that he did not care about the labor payment.
He said that he agreed with the labor payment,
but that it was more than his wife's labor payment.
He said that he did not care about the labor payment,
Such phenomena happen quite often.
They determine people's behavior.
It turns out that a qualified buyer
should know what he is doing.
Who will do it?
You are absolutely right,
the director of the staff.
The seller is not qualified,
but he is subject to difficult and incomprehensible causes.
Let's look at how the labor market works.
Let's understand how it works.
It's very difficult to do it in two minutes.
Let's start with the first approximation.
Here are two pictures.
I suggest you not pay attention to the numbers.
These are the data of 2006.
They have become obsolete.
We are not interested in the amount in dollars,
but in the picture we see.
What do we see here?
The first is a certain discrepancy in the labor market.
If you draw a graph,
it will not be a straight line,
but a set of columns with intervals.
The intervals between the columns
are different for the director of the staff
and the inspector of the department of personnel.
This is called a step in demand and supply.
Intervals between zones
where demand and supply are present.
If we get to this interval,
we will not find anyone there.
The second interesting point.
Pay attention to the areas of unsatisfied demand.
They are marked in red.
Look.
At high levels of the salary,
there is unsatisfied demand.
This means that employers are ready to pay such money,
but for some reason people are not ready to hire for such amounts.
This completely refutes the idea
that people are trying to earn as much as possible.
This is not true.
A person on the labor market
evaluates himself in a certain way.
Often it turns out that the highest level of the salary
is not offered.
This is due to the fact that
these positions have very high requirements.
Few people in the labor market
meet such requirements.
It is extremely difficult to find people
for such positions on the open labor market.
Pay attention to the conflict zones.
They are marked in red.
Here we see that either the demand is sharply increasing,
or the demand is sharply exceeding the demand.
This means that in these zones
many employers would like to find employees,
but they are not ready to pay such a high salary.
Or vice versa.
Many employers would like to get these conditions,
but they are not ready to pay such a high salary.
This is a very important point.
If we look at this graph,
we see that there are also equilibrium zones.
These are zones where labor and capital
are roughly the same.
The demand is approximately the same as the supply.
It is easy to find employees in these zones.
This is how the labor market works.
It is clear that the demand is not high.
The demand is high,
but the demand is not high.
Without understanding this system,
which is constantly changing,
it can change for several quarters.
Without understanding this system,
we will not be able to formulate a system of stimulation.
We can easily get into a conflict zone.
We can easily get into a zone of unsatisfied demand.
If we want to pay too much,
we can find employees in the zones
that are not in the labor market.
I would say that the marketing of the labor market
is the basis for the formation of a system
of payment of labor and stimulation of labor.
The right person should do this.
I urge you to study marketing.
We will not go far without it.
I would like to once again ask your attention
to the step of demand and supply.
If we look at the graphs,
we will see that in the lower layers of the market,
where the labor payment is not high,
this step is small.
In the upper layers of the market,
where the high-paid specialists
and the amount is relatively large,
the step will be large.
What is the difference?
We will talk about it later.
The next factor that determines
the system of stimulation of labor
is the opinion of the workers.
It turns out that this opinion
is a large circle of parameters.
Let's look at them in sequence.
First of all, these are the needs of a person.
It is clear that in order to support himself,
his family, his employees,
a person must earn a certain amount.
But what amount?
It is determined by needs.
How objective are these needs?
The needs of a person are the standard of living
that he should, wants and can lead.
For one, yachts, luxury villas,
Rolex watches for tens of thousands of dollars,
and for another, food and shelter.
A lot depends on the social origin of a person,
the social environment in which he lives,
family traditions, and many other factors.
But the most important thing is
the idea of what kind of life he intends to lead.
The second is investment in the future.
Investment in your own future
or investment in the future of your family.
For a young person,
investment in the future is a constant factor.
In the past century,
you could get an education
and then spend the rest of your life on it.
Now, as we know,
the management system, technology,
and everything else change so quickly
that you have to leave quickly.
Therefore, investment in your own future,
investment in the cost of your labor,
that is, education and development,
is what a person should do
for almost the entire period of his labor biography.
In the middle of this period,
a new problem arises.
It is the investment in the future of your descendants, your children.
You have to pay for education.
And since most young people
are not able to pay for it after school age,
a person should focus on making enough money
to invest in their descendants.
And finally, old age.
A person should earn enough
to provide for a period of his life
when he will not be able to earn money.
The next important factor
that determines the opinion of workers
is justice.
We have already touched on this factor.
It is quite complex.
First of all, it is the idea of a worker
about how much he should earn
on the labor market with his education and experience.
The ideas are very subjective.
Sometimes they correspond to reality,
sometimes they do not correspond at all.
But if you meet people who have received a higher education,
an additional MBA,
and have three years of work experience,
they can claim for such a salary
that our employer is not able to provide.
The next point related to the fairness of payment
is the idea of labor costs.
How much a person is willing to invest in his work,
how much he intends to give to his employer
in terms of his time, effort,
labor costs, knowledge, skills, energy, etc.
A very important factor in determining fairness
is comparing yourself to others.
A person often bases his idea of fairness
on how much his acquaintances earn,
his neighbors, his colleagues.
He is inclined to pay
according to his level of work experience.
He often thinks that if my neighbor,
who is less qualified,
is working every day,
and earns more than me,
then it is probably wrong
and I should be equal to him.
I repeat that this factor in comparison with others
is also quite subjective.
It also determines the opinion of workers
about the compensation they agree to
for their work.
Of course, this is self-assessment and level of compulsion.
A purely subjective factor
is related to the idea of fairness
and the idea of the needs,
the level of life that a person would like to lead.
A very important factor is the factor of recognition.
This is a moral factor.
It is extremely important for a person
to understand that he is not just a working horse,
that he does not just go to work to earn a living,
but that he is a respected member of society.
He is respected by society as a whole,
by the management of his enterprise,
by his employer, by his colleagues,
and finally by his friends.
I have seen examples of people
who go to work to reduce their work conditions
because of the increase in recognition,
self-assessment and the status of this work in society.
For many highly qualified specialists,
the factor of self-assessment and recognition
is largely due to the fact that they do their work
well, remarkably, and magnificently.
The factor of self-realization,
recognition, high self-esteem,
and the ability to see and appreciate yourself
as a worthy specialist,
who knows and can do what others cannot,
who is able to achieve what others cannot achieve,
is also an extremely important factor.
In a significant way, especially at a young age,
the behavior of workers in relation to work
and compensation is determined by this.
It is necessary to say a few words
about what a person considers
as a higher or lower payment of his work.
Here the principle of barely noticeable difference comes into play.
Please look at the graph.
Here we are dealing not with a straight line,
but with a curve.
Imagine that you earn 5,000 rubles a month.
How much do you need to pay as a bonus
or how much do you need to increase your salary
so that you can see that it is a significant increase or bonus?
Is 500 rubles enough for you?
Yes, it is.
And if you earn 100,000 rubles instead of 5,000 rubles,
how much money do you need to increase your salary
so that you can see that it is a significant increase or bonus?
Is 50 rubles enough? No, it is not.
And how much do you need to pay for 500 rubles?
Not less than 1,500 rubles.
Please pay attention to the curve on this graph.
It is a curve, not a straight line.
The more you earn, the greater the difference between your income and bonuses,
or, on the contrary, a reduction in your salary,
so that you can feel it.
When developing effective systems for stimulating labor,
you need to take into account this principle of barely noticeable difference.
If we try to increase the salary of a worker,
raise his rate, or pay him a bonus,
so that he can feel it,
this amount should be within the range of barely noticeable difference.
How much does this noticeable difference make?
But practice shows that it is 10-15% of the salary of a worker.
Is it always like this?
No, it is still connected with national traditions.
For example, in Japan,
a person can receive a ridiculous amount of money as a bonus.
It is assumed that his work is fully rewarded by his salary,
and the bonus is a moral boost.
It shows that he is well treated and highly respected.
If something similar happened in our country or in European culture,
I think that a worker would be very surprised.
Thus, dear colleagues,
when forming a system for stimulating labor,
when forming a bonus system,
when deciding which workers are worthy of a raise and at what level,
you must take into account the principle of barely noticeable difference.
Otherwise, you can make a mistake and lose your job.
You can either make a mistake and lose your job,
or you can offend people instead of showing their value to your organization.
In conclusion, let's look at the structure of the company's costs for the maintenance of staff.
We will look at the system of costs and investments,
in accordance with the two policy frameworks we discussed earlier.
One of the main problems of stimulating labor
for the employees of enterprises is that most of the costs
are naively attributed to labor costs.
In fact, this is not true at all.
If we calculate all the costs of the enterprise for maintaining its staff,
the sum will be at least twice or even three times more
than the total labor cost.
Let's look at the main costs of the enterprise
for maintaining its labor resources.
The first is the maintenance of workplaces.
If we have a worker,
he must have a table, a computer, a phone, a chair,
and a square meter of space, as per the sanitary standards.
It is clear that this pleasure is not so cheap.
The second is compensation.
The compensation package is offered to the worker.
We will soon look at the components of this package.
As we have already said, the costs can be very high.
We will manage the rest of our activities.
The next issue is taxation.
I can assure you that taxation for maintaining staff
is a serious and solid part of the enterprise's duties.
The next issue is the renewal and replenishment of staff.
If the organization is growing,
we need new people to work.
How can we get them?
Who will do it?
It will be your HR department.
These people need a place to work,
they need jobs,
they need to pay for their work,
but they also need to spend money on advertising,
on the fees for the staff agencies,
and on the replenishment of staff resources.
For some enterprises, especially for the growing ones,
this is a serious issue.
The next issue is the costs for managing staff.
You are the HR director,
you get your salary,
I hope it is high enough.
The department you manage
is also a cost for the enterprise
to pay for the staff.
The department also has a role
to manage the staff resources.
The last issue is the corporate activities.
This is a big part of the social package.
The total cost is not small.
All the costs are not only related to the salary.
All the other costs are also important.
You need to consider their effectiveness.
If you remember,
the committee on the system of stimulation of labor
needs specialists, including financiers and accountants.
The next thing we will talk about
is the investment in the staff.
These investments can be divided into two categories.
The first is the development and training of the staff.
In order to develop the staff,
we need to develop the career system.
In order to keep the staff,
the labor resource is more expensive than before,
we need to develop the compensation system
to make it more attractive for the staff.
This is an investment we invest in the labor resources
of our employees.
The second category is the development of the staff.
The development of the staff is a part of the system.
The third category is the development of the compensation system.
This is an investment we invest in the labor resources of our employees.
Our employees are free citizens
who live in a democratic society,
who obey the law,
they have freedom of will and the right to choose.
They can take the increase in the value of their resources
on the labor market and go to another place.
We do not want this.
A significant part of our costs for the development of the labor market
is the costs of maintaining the staff.
We can invest in other areas
that will not go away.
For example, the development of the quality of life at work.
Let's say that our employees went to the canteen
of a neighboring factory,
and now we have opened our own canteen.
We pay employees for food.
This improves the working conditions.
We can make a major renovation of the premises.
We can install new furniture.
We can install an aquarium with fish.
We can create a room for relaxation
where beautiful music will sound.
We can hire a psychologist
who will relax our employees
between the stress they experience at work.
We can invest in improving the working conditions
that will remain with us in our organization.
And finally,
we can invest in the development of the management system.
We need a system that will be able to calculate better,
that will allow us to better understand
what we spend our money on
and what we get as a result.
We need a system that will be more effective
in terms of time, labor costs,
and the number of people involved in this system.
All this will be an investment
in the development of our employees
and the working conditions.
The moral of the story is that
everything we have discussed so far
is a continuous system
that should be developed at the enterprise as a whole.
We know that one part of the system
cannot work better than the whole system.
If we put the wheels of a new Mercedes
on an old worn out car,
it will not drive better.
And as they say,
the speed of a caravan
is equal to the speed of the slowest camel.
Therefore, when we will be working
on the payment system of labor
at the enterprise,
on the stimulation system,
I urge you to pay attention
not only to this system,
but also to the whole system of costs and investments
that we have just discussed.
Because, once again,
one component of the system cannot develop and work better than the whole system.